# BIOMD0000000527: MODEL1312170001

## Installation

Download this repository, and install with distutils

`python setup.py install`

Or, install using pip

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/BIOMD0000000527.git`

To install a specific version (in this example, from the 2014-09-16 BioModels release)

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/BIOMD0000000527.git@20140916`


# Model Notes


Kaiser2014 - Salmonella persistence after ciprofloxacin treatment

The model describes the bacterial tolerance to antibiotics. Using a mouse
model for _Salmonella diarrhea_, the authors have found that bacterial
persistence occurs in the presence of the antibiotic ciprofloxacin because
_Salmonella_ can exist in two different states. One, the fast-growing
population that spreads in the host's tissues and the other, slow-growing
"persister" population that hide out inside dendritic cells of the host's
immune system and cannot be attacked by the antibiotics. However, this can be
killed by adding agents that directly stimulate the host's immune defense.

This model is described in the article:

[Cecum lymph node dendritic cells harbor slow-growing bacteria phenotypically
tolerant to antibiotic treatment.](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/24558351)

Kaiser P, Regoes RR, Dolowschiak T, Wotzka SY, Lengefeld J, Slack E, Grant AJ,
Ackermann M, Hardt WD.

PLoS Biol. 2014 Feb 18;12(2):e1001793.

Abstract:

In vivo, antibiotics are often much less efficient than ex vivo and relapses
can occur. The reasons for poor in vivo activity are still not completely
understood. We have studied the fluoroquinolone antibiotic ciprofloxacin in an
animal model for complicated Salmonellosis. High-dose ciprofloxacin treatment
efficiently reduced pathogen loads in feces and most organs. However, the
cecum draining lymph node (cLN), the gut tissue, and the spleen retained
surviving bacteria. In cLN, approximately 10%-20% of the bacteria remained
viable. These phenotypically tolerant bacteria lodged mostly within
CD103⁺CX₃CR1⁻CD11c⁺ dendritic cells, remained genetically susceptible to
ciprofloxacin, were sufficient to reinitiate infection after the end of the
therapy, and displayed an extremely slow growth rate, as shown by mathematical
analysis of infections with mixed inocula and segregative plasmid experiments.
The slow growth was sufficient to explain recalcitrance to antibiotics
treatment. Therefore, slow-growing antibiotic-tolerant bacteria lodged within
dendritic cells can explain poor in vivo antibiotic activity and relapse.
Administration of LPS or CpG, known elicitors of innate immune defense,
reduced the loads of tolerant bacteria. Thus, manipulating innate immunity may
augment the in vivo activity of antibiotics.

This model is hosted on [BioModels Database](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/)
and identified by:
[MODEL1312170001](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.db/MODEL1312170001).

To cite BioModels Database, please use: [BioModels Database: An enhanced,
curated and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic
models](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/20587024).

To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.


